>> Jon Kuperman: Kind of back
over here on the lessons page,
we've got this memory leak section.
So what we wanna do is this is a page
that I made that has a memory leak on it.
And we wanna see what tools that
we have for catching memory leaks.
So the first one, [LAUGH] is the only
thing that I show that's actually not part
of the developer tools, but
it is part of Chrome which is really cool.
So if you go to these three
dots up in Chrome, and
you go down to More Tools > Task Manager.
I'm not sure how many of you knew, but
Chrome has a task manager where it keeps
track of each tab and its performance.
And then by default,
JavaScript memory won't be on there.
So you'll want to right-click up at
these headers and add JavaScript memory.
And then it should show up.
And then you'll wanna select this
top-down view of JavaScript memory.
And so what we can kind see here,
I know it's small.
Unfortunately, I can't zoom in, but as we
see, we've got three tabs open, right?
Really, I think two of
them are from my slides.
And the two of them from my slides with
those Ss on them are stable, right?
They're not moving cuz they use
the memory they needed to use and
now they're using it.
But mine is mastering from DevTools is
just going up and up and up and up.
So that's one easy way to see.
If your site's just sitting here and
your JavaScript memory usage is going up,
that's a really good way of
knowing you have a memory leak.
A way of visualizing it is
if you open up DevTools,
you can go ahead and
pin this back to the bottom.
And then you go to the Performance tab.
Again, performance and
memory kind of have a lot in common.
The performance tab is the best one for
spotting a memory leak.
The memory tab is the best one for
figuring out what it is
that's what's going on.
So with the Performance tab,
we'll check this memory checkbox here.
And remember in the last section
I said when you're doing
performance recordings for CPU,
you make them as short as possible.
When you're doing performance recordings
from memory, you wanna do them longer,
cuz you wanna see it over time.
You're not looking at the CPU.
So I'll hit it.
I'll let it run for
usually a couple of seconds.
It doesn't need to run for
a significant amount of time, but
you do wanna see is this building
over time as opposed to a one second.
It might not see anything.
So go ahead and stop that.
I'm gonna move down the summary view.
What I'm gonna do is at this time is
I'm gonna move up the memory view
>> Jon Kuperman: I'll try to move these
tools.
>> Jon Kuperman: And
here we go, this is the jigsaw pattern
that we don't wanna see, right?
And so what we can see is what
you normally want to see and
actually I think there's some good
examples, yeah, so this yellow,
this event listener is a great example.
So the page starts, and
they start reasonably high,
a decent amount of memory being used.
And then they finish and
a garbage collection happens here.
We'll get into garbage
collection in a second.
And then they're done, right?
Then yellow is back to this, just one.
Whereas the blue, you see it kind
of starts off its thing here.
And it does clean and then it just starts
growing and growing and growing and
growing and we're not doing anything.
This might be normal if it was
calculating something, but for
a page just to be sitting here, we
shouldn't be seeing these jigsaws, right?
And so this is always the shape that
you want to watch for is this up and
up and up jigsaw.
A cool thing about this is that it
tells you specifically what type of
memory it is.
So it breaks it into JavaScript memory,
document memory nodes, like elements and
event listeners.
And it kind of breaks
into those categories so
at least you have some clue
of where to start with it.
So then the next thing you want to do,
confirming you have a memory leak,
which you do via the task manager and
via the Performance tab,
is you wanna go into the memory section.
And basically they have these kind
of three tools for analyzing memory,
cuz now we're getting into,
well, what's using that memory?
What's going on here?
The first one is a heap snapshot, so
it just grabs the whole memory heap,
everything that's being used,
and it'll show it to you.
[SOUND] Paused because of
potential out of memory crash.
My fault,
>> Jon Kuperman: Too much memory.
Okay, cool.
So the first one is it
takes a heap snapshot, and
these are really cool because they'll
show you everything that's being used,
so you can see what's
using the most memory.
But what's also really neat about
them is you can take multiple and
compare them to each other.
So you can take one,
give it a few seconds, take another one,
compare them to each other,
see what's changed.
Beyond that,
you can do these kind of allocations.
And so these are really cool,
these kind of allocations over time.
It's basically the same as taking
a bunch of heap snapshots, but
you can start seeing,
is the memory going up and up and up?
Or is it going up and down,
these different things.
So an allocation will take
a long amount of time, and
then it'll just grab a few heaps as
you go through there, basically.
And so then this one is like
on allocation sampling.
So basically it's like,
takes it over a long period of time,
it'll take a bunch of
different samples there.
So this kind of breaks into
a little bit of a hard to tell.
Do you have a memory leak that's very
obvious, like the one on the demo page
that I have where in six seconds
you see it just growing?
Or do you have one that you suspect over
a long period of time as you're using
the app, in which case you
can start the sampling and
you go back to using your apps.
So I've had apps before that people
use throughout their whole day.
Creatives will use to draw and
save files, or whatever.
It seems after about an hour of use,
the site gets really slow.
That's harder to debug, right?
So we can do one of these samplings and
we can just go back to using the site.
As it gets slow we can end it, and
then we can see what's going on.
But for today's stuff we can just get
away with just some heap snapshots, or
we can do the allocation time line.
So let me show what those look like.
So from the lessons page
I'll go to memory leaks, and
then I'm going to click Heap snapshot
here and then I'll take a heap snapshot.
And so what this does is it shows me
everything that's taking up memory.
Before we get too much further I wanna get
into the concept of garbage collection,
something I've mentioned a few times.
So with scripting languages where
you're not manually allocating and
deallocating memory,
there's this kind of garbage collection.
And the basic idea,
it's called the mark and sweep technique.
So the idea is it looks at everything
that you have and it's like,
are you still using this?
That's basically the very simple idea.
It goes from thing to thing and it's like
are you using this, cool, I'll keep it,
no I'm gonna get rid of it then.
And so it's this process that's
constantly happening, right?
And so it's like, yeah, if you make
an array and you do console.log it and
then nothing else in that
function completes and
nothing else has any pointers added or
anything like that.
It's like, cool, nobody's pointing at you.
So this is where you get in if you've
heard anything like looking at JavaScript
closures before.
They're interesting because when
you have a closure in JavaScript,
it retains this reference
to its outer scope, right?
So you have a function
that returns a function,
and that inner function has this closure.
So that means as long as that
inner function is around, you
can't get rid of the outer function cuz at
any time it might call in to that, right?
And so you kinda get these concepts where
it's like, these are kinda pointers.
Is there anything that's still
around that's pointing at it?
If there is, then we can't get rid of it.
If there's not,
then we can totally get rid of it.
And so you'll see this, if you created
an element, it'll put it in memory.
And then you get rid of that element
on the next garbage collection,
it'll be cool.
Nobody uses you anymore.
You've been removed.
We can get rid of you.
So it keeps this, when coding correctly,
it keeps this pretty
stable area where you can just
constantly be kind of cleaning up.
A neat thing on the performance if you
want to check garbage collections,
they actually have this little can here.
So you can start a performance timeline.
You can manually force
a garbage collection,
and then you can end
the performance timeline and
see if everything gets cleaned up,
because it probably should.
But over here in memory, what you see
is you see this concept of shallow and
retained size, right?
And this gets exactly into
the garbage collection concept.
So shallow is how big are you?
If you're an array with 50 items in it,
that is your size.
That's your shallow size, right.
If you're a variable,
that points to another array
that has a million items in it.
As a variable, you're pretty small.
But the thing that you point to and what
retained size means is if I could get rid
of you, that would let me get rid of
all these other things, too, right?
So think about it, if you're the last
pointer, add something huge.
Then your shallow size is gonna be really
small, but your retained size, meaning
the size that we could free up if we were
able to get rid of you, is pretty large.
So you'll kinda see this concept.
So what we wanna know is not
necessarily about retained size.
We wanna know what in and
of itself is the biggest, right?
And so we can organize by shallow size.
So we can see the biggest things
on this page are strings.
They're huge.
And if we drill into them,
we can start seeing all of these
big strings that I've created.
[LAUGH] That is a problem,
here with the memory leak.
And so this kind of gives
you a pretty great idea.
If it doesn't give you
a really clear idea,
what I mentioned you can do before
is you can take multiple snapshots.
So we've got our one here from
when the page has just started.
I'll go back to profiles and
I'll just take another snapshot.
So now we've got two snapshots.
And instead of the summary view up here,
I'll do a comparison view.
So now we're comparing this
snapshot two to snapshot one.
And so what I wanna see is between the two
because both happened after the page was
finished loading.
What's new, and so we can go here and
we can see that, again, no surprise,
just strings.
But if you were unclear about what was
taking up memory, you can take two
snapshots at different times and compare
them to each other, what has changed.
And so you can see these strings
have changed, these are the strings.
All these strings have been added.
None of them have been deleted, so
there's a delta of +2,427 strings and
they take up a lot of room.
So you can drill down to these strings and
you can see all sorts of cool stuff.
You can see where they are.
They live inside of these arrays, and you
can see that they're in the window object.
You can find all this really
cool information about them.
So you can kinda start narrowing down on,
okay, I know I have a memory leak
from the jigsaw and the task manager.
I know it's string-based because the
strings are the thing that are so big, and
I can get some information.
Some code is making these arrays
full of these big strings here.
And you can kind of start narrowing down
what part of your code base might be doing
that, based on that.
There's not often a great
way of jumping to sources,
like we've seen in other panels.
And you know the performance panel,
it knows what line of code is responsible.
So you can very easily hop there.
And the memory panel is not keeping
track of what code created that thing.
So it gets a little bit harder.
But it can give you a lot of really
good insight on what the problem is.
Is there a memory leak, what's causing it,
what type of information is there?